here when the Williams presidency John Calhoun vice presidency we're just getting started yeah as a matter of fact I forgot to mention I also met I mean I was impressed I got to meet everybody I met when already
And I also met John Calhoun briefly.
I mean, it was just 15 minutes or something like that.
But I remember Dean Renardi.
He was particularly funny.
He said, well, just remember that if you want to get ahead here, he said the thing to do is make sure you don't have chaos in the classroom.
But he said the main thing is going to be that you're going to have to publish like hell.
And I said, well, that's not a real problem.
But I'll never forget, he said, as long as there's not chaos in the classroom, that's okay.
Not a great innovator for teaching.
So you got here in August of 71.
Yes, August of 71.
I will not ask any more, but what was the beginning salary?
Oh, beginning salary was $14,000.
And I was making, let's see, I was making $12,000 at Washington State.
And actually, it wasn't a whole lot of an improvement because I had to pay for my moving down here.
Washington State had paid to move me to Washington State.
Ooh.
But I had to pay to come down here.
So anyway, but that was in 1971.
And while between the spring when I had accepted the position and the fall, I had, at Bob Skorbonik's request, actually written a course description for a new course.
called Introduction to Anthropology.
And when I arrived here in the fall of 1971, I taught two sections of Introduction to Anthropology.
And there were about 60 students in each section.
And those were the first courses to actually be taught on the Texas A&M campus
in anthropology.
Was there even a course prefix anthro?
Actually, it was.
It was A-N-T-H.
Oh, it was?
Okay.
They started out that way.
But I discovered shortly after I arrived here that there was already another A-N-T-H course being offered and had been taught for about four years.
And this was a course in physical anthropology that was being taught by Sidney O. Brown in the Department of
biology, I guess it was.
Sidney Brown was a crusty old guy.
He was a retired naval captain who had served in the Second World War, had been all over the world, and considered himself
I don't know if he had a PhD or not, but he was really a biologist.
But he considered himself an authority on the races of man.
And his course, although I never took it, some of the students that took my course had taken his course, and so I quizzed them about it.
But his final exam consisted of a hundred slides that he would show on the board.
And the students would have to name the race.
of each of the hundred slides.
Sidney Brown was a great believer in a book that was published by Carlton Kuhn in 1957 called The Races of Mankind, in which Kuhn identified more than 50 different racial types of humans
Today, of course, we don't even believe that races exist.
There are different phenotypes, as they're called, but they're all one race.
It's interesting that in the anthropology department right now, we have a set of cast, plaster cast of these 53 races, which was used here by Sidney Brown
back in the late 60s and early 70s.
Anyway, so Sidney Brown taught this course and we objected because we said it was really against anthropology practice because by that time anthropologists had disavowed the whole thing of race.
But nevertheless,
The agreement was that until he retired, he had exclusive right to teach that course.
And when he retired, then anthropology would get that course.
And he did retire a few years later, and we did get the course.
Even today, that course is still cross-listed with biology.
So it is remaining a cross-listed course.
So that first semester, fall of 71,
You had two sections of anthropology.
Did you have any other teaching?
No.
There was two sections of about 60 students each, and that was it.
And in the spring, I taught the same thing again.
And during that first year, at the time, we were located in the agronomy building way down here, which is actually right across from where we are now, down near the old heap.
a cattle showing place.
But anyway, in that first year, the reason I only had a two course load was my job was to begin adding courses.
And I began writing up new course descriptions.
In fact, in the fall of 1971 and early 1972, I wrote new courses for cultural anthropology, for introduction to North American Indians, introduction to peoples and cultures of the world, North American archaeology, introduction to archaeology.
So I wrote four or five courses, which we got through the coordinating board and approved.
so that we could begin in the fall of 1972 teaching some more courses.
I was also charged with going out and finding a second anthropologist, and I went to the University of Texas and found a friend of mine by the name of Harry Shaffer,
who was an archaeologist.
Now, why hire an archaeologist?
Because the University of Texas at Austin was very strong in cultural anthropology and linguistics and folklore, really, at that time.
But they were very understaffed.
In fact, they only had one archaeologist.
So I thought that the best way for us to compete successfully with the University of Texas was to build a strong archaeology department.
So I started off with Dr. Shaffer.
And he came over in the fall of 1972.
And it's the same time we moved to Bolton Hall from the Agronomy Building, so we're now moved to Bolton Hall.
In 1972 to 1973, we began offering a lot of these other courses.
Harry and I both taught this, you know, we taught North American Indians, we taught cultural anthropology,
North American archaeology, archaeology, introduction anthropology, we were just, you know, a jack of all trades.
And we began looking for a new anthropologist, this time a cultural anthropologist,
And we hired a guy by the name of Norman Thomas from Northern New Mexico University.
Norman Thomas worked in Mesoamerica.
Where did he do his PhD?
Do you remember?
Berkeley.
He got his PhD at Berkeley.
Harry had gotten his PhD at the University of Texas at Austin.
But he had good background.
He worked with the good people.
Foster was a very prominent anthropologist at Berkeley.
The reason we hired Norman Thomas was that he was a bibliophile, and he loved to work with library books.
And after looking at our library holdings at that time and seeing that they were severely delinquent in the field of anthropology, I thought, in fact, I told Dr. Thomas that if we hired him, his primary job would be to build us a library
collection and anthropology, and that's precisely what he did during his career here.
What did the, what role did the library do?
Where did you get the funding for them?
Well, this was always a problem.
I mean, we... For the library?
Yeah, it was always a problem for the library and for us.
I mean, we continued to plead for more and more funding.
At first, it varied.
Some years we got quite a big chunk, and some years we didn't.
Dave Maxwell did what he could.
The library, of course, was expanding.
The university was expanding at record speed, and so there was a tremendous demand on the library from many different fields.
So it's not that we felt left out.
It's just that we were trying to get as big a piece of the pie as we could.
And part of the problem was that we had to turn in the names of the books that we wanted.
And this took some, you know, it took some time.
You had to fill out the forms and you had to go find which ones were missing and which ones weren't.
So it did take a lot of time.
So this is why Norman was hired.
He wasn't as good a scholar as we might have wanted, but he served us well in this area.
And those first few years,
Who outside the department deserves the most credit for being supportive of the growth and development of anthropology?
I'd have to say David Maxwell, really, Maxwell more than anybody else was very good.
Jack Williams, I don't know what direct role he played, although he was always very congenial.
It was very interesting.
One of the things I discovered very early on is his wife's maiden name was Bryant.
And so every time we would see them, we were always buddy-buddy.
And I remember talking to her many times about mutual possible relatives and things like that.
But anyway, I really admired Dr. Williams and hated to see him leave when he did.
And during those early years, were you all identified as a section or a what?
Well, up until 1983, we were just part of sociology.
Right, but from the very first, was the title of the department listed as sociology and?
Yes, yes.
When I, actually, when it was created in 1969,
It was created as the Department of Sociology and Anthropology.
And so it remained that for some years.
And I'll get to that in a minute.
Anyway, so 1972, 1973, we hired Norman Thomas.
We taught a number of courses.
And also, this was the first year that we established something called the Cultural Resource Laboratory.
The Cultural Resource Laboratory was a...
Research arm of the program or group really consisted of Harry and me.
And what we did was go out and compete for contracts, archaeological contracts.
Now what happens is the federal government under the antiquities law is required to do salvage work of sites that are going to be destroyed or impaired anyway by federal or state activities.
So when they identify these areas, people bid for them.
And so we started bidding for these.
And we did this under the rubric of the Cultural Resource Laboratory.
So we began to build that up.
We hired, began hiring some staff archaeologists, not faculty, but staff archaeologists to help us go out.
And we started small, but it began to mushroom and turn into something pretty big.
Which was the, what was a kind of a big step first of those contracts that really mattered?
We got a couple of little ones and then in, let's see, I was trying to remember, we started in 1972 and we were writing everything that came along we started writing requests for.
And this takes quite a bit of time because you have to write, you have to go out and research the area, you have to decide what you're going to do, how to do it, you have to program this thing out.
It's like writing an NSF grant.
It's not something that's really easy to do.
It takes a lot of time.
But anyway, we were frantically writing these things with the idea that if we wrote enough of them, we'd get one.
You know, put enough pokers in the fire, one of them gets hot.
Well, in 1972 and early 1973, we wrote a number of these.
And in the spring of 1973, no, spring of 1974,
Yeah, spring of 1974, we got five.
Five of these that we had requested all hit.
And it's one of these things where you don't really say no thank you.
We were the winning bids.
And these were five pretty good-sized contracts.
I mean, at the time, they were like $50,000 or $60,000 a piece, which back in those days was a lot of money.
We were frantically running around the state trying to find qualified staff members to help us.
We were spread pretty thin.
But, you know, somehow we managed to do it.
And it was at this time we decided we needed another archaeologist.
So I sent Harry, who was an archaeologist, out to try to find another archaeologist.
I said, Harry, for God's sake, go find somebody you can work with.
So he went to the Society for American Archaeology meetings in April, came back with glowing, well, you know, anyway, remarks about Dr. Bruce Dixon, who was working at the University of Tennessee at the time for, under a guy by the name of Richard Bass, anyway.
So we hired Bruce.
He came to visit.
Everything looked great.
We hired him.
And he hadn't been here more than two months before he and Harry got into a big hoopla and wouldn't talk to each other anymore.
And so I said, oh, my lord.
I said, you know, what we really don't need right now is friction between the two archaeologists.
I don't really know who was at fault, but nevertheless for many years they were sort of like opposing poles on a magnet.
But anyway, Bruce did help us out with some of our contract work, but it made a real problem because Harry had a big chunk, Bruce had a little chunk, and the same people that worked for Harry wouldn't work for Bruce, and wouldn't work for Bruce, wouldn't work.
Ah, it was a big mess.
But anyway, we nevertheless managed to plot on.
All right, so in those early years, you're inferring to me that there wasn't one grant
one project that really did something, it was the accumulation of a bunch.
What happened was that first, you know, we got a couple little ones, like, you know, five, ten thousand dollar jobs, which we could complete in a short period of time.
And we had been writing all these big ones, hoping to get one.
But then we got five.
And so, really, for a couple years there, we were spread very, very thin.
Geographically, where were they?
Most of them were, well, one was at Fort Richardson, which was up near Wichita Falls.
That was an old pre-Civil War Army base.
Mm-hmm.
and they wanted that reconstructed.
We found out a lot about it.
For one thing, the original drawings and survey were completely wrong.
I don't know where in the world they got the data, but the archaeology that we found did not match the maps that were drawn back in 1840s or 18, I guess it was 1850s, 1850s, shortly after Texas became a state, before the Civil War.
And even after the Civil War, they went back and occupied it again.
We also worked in San Gabriel, which was over near Georgetown, and Williamson County, over Williams County over there, and also up in near Milam.
These were a lot of Corps of Engineers projects.
All in Texas?
Yes, all in Texas, right.
And they were all fairly close by.
And this involved both faculty and students?
Well, you know, we still only had an undergraduate program.
And yes, we were hiring a few undergraduates to go out as shovel bums, people to dig and so forth.
But we didn't have a graduate program.
And so most of the expertise we had to hire from outside.
We were hiring mainly people from the University of Texas, Texas Tech, some people from Louisiana, and just literally anybody we could find.
When did you all get hired?
undergraduate major approved, do you remember?
The next year in 1975.
1974 was a busy year on top of all of this stuff.
We also were writing requests to the coordinating board to get a bachelor's in anthropology, which we did get the following year in 1975.
Up until that time, generalize about the students that took the courses in anthropology.
What was their major?
What was their background?
What were their career goals?
Well, that's very interesting because in the very beginning, anthropology was not included as a degree requirement on any degree at Texas A&M University.
And since we did not have an anthropology degree, we had nothing.
So every student that took anthropology had to take it as an open elective.
A lot of programs were fairly restrictive on how many of these open elective students could take.
So there really wasn't a large group of students from which to choose.
This was before the business school.
Most of the students we got were from other majors in liberal arts, people who were in sociology or psychology or economics or something like that.
There were a few engineers.
a few people from agriculture, but we had a really hard time getting those classes very large.
I mean, most of the classes were 30, 40, 50, which in retrospect was a dream compared to what we're doing now.
One of the things we did to try to stir up more business was that we started, probably by 1973, we started these monthly movies.
We would rent these 16-millimeter movies of, well, what punk people would call bizarre stuff.
One of them was called Dead Birds, another one was called The Hunt, and things like this, and show them.
Over, we showed them in Zachary, and we showed them in the MSC, and we would put flyers all over campus telling people, free movies, see?
And we got quite a good reception of people coming to these things, and I suspect some of these people probably ended up taking our courses.
But in the early days, before the core curriculum or anything like that, or before we had a major, it was a real fight to get people, first of all, to even recognize what anthropology was, or to even try taking the courses.
So, yes, it was.
Now, were they juniors and seniors by and large?
That's hard to, it's hard to remember whether they were primarily juniors or seniors or freshmen.
I think there was a fairly good smattering of.
What about male, female?
I do remember that when I first got here in 1971, there weren't that many females on the campus.
But I remember that we had a fairly good selection of them, yes.
I would say that the females have always been more prone towards anthropology probably than males.
Do you remember any comments of other faculty members and or deans or anything characterizing anthropology in those early years?
Well, yes.
I remember and I can't remember who it was.
There was some administrator.
who when I told him that I was teaching anthropology said oh yeah that's that subject is all about monkeys isn't it I don't remember the administrator but it was some administrator okay the other thing I do remember is
A couple years later, after we actually had a degree, about 1976, I guess it was, we had hired a physical anthropologist by the name of Ordon Orian, who had worked with Richard Leakey in Africa.
And he was doing some primate work with some primates down in San Antonio at the Primate Center.
And he had this chimpanzee, and there was a picture of him holding this chimpanzee that appeared in the front page of the New York Times or something.
And Oyen had a full beard and a mustache, you know.
I mean, he looked sort of almost like a, well, you know, like a caveman.
And he's holding this primate, and he was talking about evolution.
And I remember Jack Williams was still president, and they, an alumni, I don't remember who,
had written this letter to the President requesting that he immediately fire this person because, you know, yes, because he had a beard,
and because he was espousing on evolution and was disgracing A&M by being photographed with a chimpanzee.
You know, it was going to make A&M look like a monkey school.
Well, William sent the letter on to me and said, just thought you might be interested in this.
Nothing ever came of it, of course, but I always thought that was rather humorous.
But that was in the early days.
Did the formal proposal for a major run into any snags along the way?
Not to my recollection.
We applied for that in 1974.
As far as I know, it went right through the curriculum committee lickety-split.
By 1975, in the fall of 75, we could actually offer majors in anthropology.
Did it officially have to go to the coordinating board?
Yes, it did.
And no snags there, as far as you know?
As far as I remember, the BA went through really quickly.
And then in the fall of 1976, I guess it was,
Let's see, shortly after we had, probably 1976, I'm trying to look down here, we hired more people.
I guess it was in the fall, it was either the fall of, I think it was the fall of 75 when we may have gotten a BA, but I really think it was the fall of 76, fall of 75 or 76.
What happened was Dr. Kopp, Jim Kopp, who was the new head of sociology COPP ran into some severe financial problems and by the end of the fiscal year he was running a severe deficit in sociology and anthropology.
And so his solution for balancing the budget was to tap what resource funding he could find that was being used by individuals within the department, including a lot of our funds which were being used for contract archaeology.
And so he tapped some of these accounts to balance his books.
And when I protested, he basically said, well, I'm the department head.
I have the right to do that.
So I went to Maxwell and said, you know, this is not fair.
We want out.
So Maxwell agreed, and he then made us a separate program.
And this was in the fall, I think, of 1976.
We became a separate program within the department
sociology and anthropology.
I was appointed as a program head and some very interesting things happened.
First of all there was no increase in salary because I wasn't really a head.
I was a program head but not a department head.
And the second thing was that I couldn't sit on the executive council because I was a program head, not a department head.
So I had a lot of the responsibilities of a department head without any of the remunerations that generally go with it.
We had a separate budget that was within sociology, but sociology couldn't spend our money.
So we were answerable to our own budget.
And once we had our own budget, starting in 1976, then we were happier anyway.
Even though we were still in sociology, and even though sociology still controlled a lot of what we did and so forth, at least we had physical control.
When you have physical control, you have authority.
Compared to sociology, you all were doing reasonably well in bringing in money on your own, weren't you?
We were actually doing better.
That's right.
Yes.
The contract program, which Harry and I started in 1972, really blossomed and took off after we got those five big grants.
We then had quite a big staff.
We had more people to help write more of these things.
We were beginning to gain a reputation of doing good work.
And so, yes, it began to mushroom and we began to get more.
1976, we got a large NSF grant of over $100,000, which at that time was a lot.
to go out and do the paleoethnobotanical study and paleoarchaeological study of Heinz Cave, which was a big cave out in West Texas out in the Amnistad Reservoir.
It was a continuation of what had been done when I was a graduate student when Dr. Jelks had gotten that grant.
This was
What we wanted to do was go out and do a site correctly.
We wanted to go out and look at the archaeology.
We wanted to look at the botany.
We wanted to look at the animal fauna.
We wanted to look at the skeletal remains and the whole works.
And so this started in 1976 and went for a couple of years.
And all of this kind of mushroomed.
We were doing so well with our contract work.
We got the big NSF grant.
We really got, it's one of these cases where we're running so fast that we stumble.
There was too much going on.
There were too many things happening.
Harry was getting spread too thin because he was trying to run the contract program where he was working on the NSF grant trying to teach courses and so forth.
So I decided as the department or program head, I decided that for Harry's good, I had to relieve him of that responsibility and we had to hire somebody to actually head up the cultural resource laboratory whose primary job would be to do that and that's it.
I don't think Harry ever forgave me for that.
But I really don't think it could have gone on the way it was.
We were beginning to run into fiscal troubles as well because so many different accounts that we were having a hard time keeping track of what was being spent.
So we hired Irv Garrison from the University of Missouri to come down and be the new head of the contract program.
This was in 1970, about 77, 78, around in there.
probably 76, 77, right around the middle.
And he came down and headed up the contract program.
And shortly after he got here, he got a sizable grant to excavate the CSA Georgia, which was a Confederate gunboat, an ironclad, that had been scuttled in the Savannah Harbor.
and was an obstacle to navigation.
So the Corps of Engineers hired Garrison to excavate it.
And this was really our first adventure into underwater archaeology.
Now, a lot of this was all going on at the same time because when we got into doing this kind of work,
A guy by the name of Carl Clausen, who was the state archaeologist, state underwater archaeologist at the time, and had been excavating some ships off the coast of Padre Island.
These were a series of five ships that had sunk in 1555, 1556.
Anyway, he came over to talk to us one day, and he said, hey, Texas A&M would be a wonderful place to start a program in nautical archaeology.
Of course, he was looking for a job.
And so we had Garrison here, and we said, well, gee, that's not like a good idea.
So I asked him, I said, well, if we were going to do this, who should we get?
And he said, well, the primary leader in underwater archaeology is Dr. George Bass of the University of Pennsylvania.
And why don't you get him?
So, hey, I said, do you know him?
And Carl said, yeah, I've met him a couple of times.
He said, I'll give him a call and tell him you're going to call him.
So in 1977, I picked up the phone one day and called George Bass and said, Hi, George, this is Vaughn Bryant, you know, Texas A&M.
And he was a little bit hesitant, very guarded at first.
I mean, you know, out of the clear blue and so forth.
I had gained permission from Dean Maxwell to at least investigate the possibilities of this.
And so we began investigating the possibilities.
And as we moved into this further and further, John Calhoun became very interested in it.
And shortly thereafter, George came down to campus.
And one of the things that I always sort of see as sort of a slap in the face, really, in a way, was that when George Bass landed at the airport, shortly after he landed, he was whisked off to see George Calhoun and Dean Maxwell and Wernarty and some of the other people.
And I was completely left out and cold.
I was not included in any of the negotiations or not included or even asked about anything.
And the next thing I knew, it was all signed, sealed, and delivered.
The American Institute of Nautical Archaeology, which George was the head of, a private foundation, was going to move their headquarters from Philadelphia to Texas A&M University.
They were going to hire George.